CHAPTER 25
THE BAROQUE IN NORTHERN EUROPE FRAMING THE ERA International Trade and Art Patronage in the Dutch Republic
In 1648, after decades of continuous border skirmishes with the Spaniards, the northern Nether-lands achieved official recognition as the United Provinces of the Netherlands (the Dutch Republic; map 25-1). The new independent republic owed its ascendance largely to its success in international trade. Dutch ships laden with goods roamed the world, sailing as far as North and South America, western Africa, China, Japan, and the Pacific islands. Peter Mundy, a widely traveled Englishman, commented in 1640 on the irony that the Dutch
Republic produced almost nothing on its own land yet enjoyed great wealth and could afford rare commodities from around the world:
For although the land (and that with much labor) is brought only to pasture . . . yet by means of their shipping they are plentifully supplied with what the earth affords for the use of man . . . from any part of the world . . . Europe, Asia, Africa or America . . . with the most precious and rich commodities of those parts.1
The prosperous Dutch were justifiably proud of their accomplishments, and the popularity of
still-life paintings—particularly images of accumulated goods—reflected this pride. These paintings of worldly possessions marked the emergence of an important new class of art patrons—wealthy mer-chants—who had tastes distinctly different from those of the leading patrons elsewhere in Baroque Europe, namely royalty and the Catholic Church. Dutch still lifes, which were well suited to the Protes-tant ethic rejecting most religious art, are among the finest ever painted. They are meticulously crafted images both scientific in their optical accuracy and poetic in their beauty and lyricism. One of the best Dutch paintings of this genre is Vanitas Still Life (fig. 25-1) by Pieter Claesz (1597–1660), in which the painter presented a prosperous household’s material possessions strewn across a tabletop or dresser. The ever-present morality and humility central to the Calvinist faith tem-pered Dutch pride in worldly goods, however. Thus, although Claesz fostered the appreciation and enjoyment of the beauty and value of the objects he depicted, he also reminded viewers of life’s tran-sience by incorporating references to death. Art historians call works of this type vanitas (vanity) paintings, and each of its symbolic elements a memento mori (reminder of death). In Claesz’s Vanitas Still Life, references to mortality include the skull, timepiece, tipped glass, and cracked walnut. All sug-gest the passage of time or something or someone that was here but now is gone. Claesz emphasized this element of time (and demonstrated his technical virtuosity) by including a self-portrait reflected in the glass ball on the left side of the table. He appears to be painting this still life. But in an apparent challenge to the message of inevitable mortality that vanitas paintings convey, the portrait serves to immortalize the artist.


WAR AND TRADE IN NORTHERN EUROPE
During the 17th and early 18th centuries, numerous geopolitical shifts occurred in Europe as the fortunes of individual countries rose and fell. Pronounced political and religious friction resulted in widespread unrest and warfare. Indeed, between 1562 and 1721, all of Europe was at peace for a mere four years. The major con-flict of this period was the Thirty Years’ War (1618–1648), which ensnared Spain, France, Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands,
Germany, Austria, Poland, the Ottoman Empire, and the Holy Roman Empire. Although the outbreak of the war had its roots in the conflict between militant Catholics and militant Protestants, the driving force quickly shifted to secular, dynastic, and nationalistic concerns. Among the major political entities vying for expanded power and authority in Europe were the Bourbon dynasty of France and the Habsburg dynasties of Spain and the Holy Roman Empire. The war, which concluded with the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, was largely responsible for the political restructuring of Europe (map 25-1). As a result, the United Provinces of the Netherlands (the Dutch Republic), Sweden, and France expanded their author-ity. Spanish and Danish power diminished. In addition to recon-figuring territorial boundaries, the Peace of Westphalia in essence granted freedom of religious choice throughout Europe. This agree-ment thus marked the abandonment of the idea of a united Chris-tian Europe, and accepted the practical realities of secular political systems. The building of today’s nation-states was emphatically under way. The 17th century also brought heightened economic compe-tition to Europe. Much of the foundation for worldwide mercan-tilism—extensive voyaging and geographic exploration, improved mapmaking, and advances in shipbuilding—had been laid in the previous century. In the 17th century, however, changes in financial systems, lifestyles, and trading patterns, along with expanding colo-nialism, fueled the creation of a worldwide marketplace. In 1609, the Dutch founded the Bank of Amsterdam, which eventually became the center of European transfer banking, with Amsterdam usurping Antwerp as the richest center of commerce in Europe. By establish-ing a system in which merchant firms held money on account, the bank relieved traders of having to transport precious metals as pay-ment. Trading practices became more complex. Rather than simple reciprocal trading, triangular trade (trade among three parties) facilitated access to a larger pool of desirable goods. Exposure to an ever-growing array of goods affected European diets and lifestyles. Tea (from China) and, later, coffee (from island colonies) became popular beverages over the course of the 17th century. Equally explosive was the growth of sugar use. Sugar, tobacco, and rice were slave crops, and the slave trade expanded to meet the demand for these goods. Traders captured and enslaved Africans and shipped them to European colonies and the Americas to provide the requi-site labor force for producing these commodities. The
resulting worldwide mercantile system permanently
changed the face of Europe. The prosperity generated by interna-tional trade affected social and political relationships, necessitat-ing new rules of etiquette and careful diplomacy. With increased disposable income, more of the newly wealthy spent money on art, significantly expanding the market for artworks, especially small-scale paintings for private homes (see “The Art Market in the Dutch Republic,” page 747).
FLANDERS
In the 16th century, the Netherlands had come under the crown of Habsburg Spain when Emperor Charles V retired, leaving the Spanish kingdoms, their Italian and American possessions, and the Netherlandish provinces to his only legitimate son, Philip II (r. 1556–1598). (Charles bestowed his imperial title and German lands on his brother.) Philip’s repressive measures against the Protestants led the northern provinces to break from Spain and establish the Dutch Republic. The southern provinces remained under Spanish control and retained Catholicism as their official religion. The polit-ical distinction between modern Holland and Belgium more or less reflects this original separation, which in the 17th century signaled not only religious but also artistic differences.
painting
The major artistic media of 17th-century Flanders (the Span-ish Netherlands) were prints and illustrated books and oil paint-ings. Flemish Baroque painters retained close connections to the
Baroque art of Catholic Europe. By contrast, the Dutch schools of painting developed their own subjects and styles, consistent with their reformed religion and the new political, social, and economic structure of the Dutch Republic.
Peter Paul Rubens. The greatest 17th-century Flemish painter was Peter Paul Rubens (1577–1640), a towering figure in the his-tory of Western art. Rubens built on the innovations of the Italian Renaissance and Baroque masters to formulate the first truly pan-European painting style. Rubens’s art is an original and powerful synthesis of the manners of many masters, especially Michelangelo, Titian, Carracci, and Caravaggio. His style had wide appeal, and his influence was international. Among the most learned individuals of his time, Rubens possessed an aristocratic education and a cour-tier’s manner, diplomacy, and tact, which, with his facility for lan-guage, made him the associate of princes and scholars. He became court painter to the dukes of Mantua (descended from Mantegna’s patrons); friend of King Philip IV (r. 1621–1665) of Spain and his adviser on collecting art; painter to Charles I (r. 1625–1649) of England and Marie de’ Medici (1573–1642) of France; and perma-nent court painter to the Spanish governors of Flanders. Rubens also won the confidence of his royal patrons in matters of state. They often entrusted him with diplomatic missions of the highest importance. To produce a steady stream of
paintings for a rich and powerful inter-national clientele, Rubens employed scores of assistants. He also became a highly successful art dealer, buying and selling contemporary artworks and classical antiquities for royal and aristocratic clients throughout Europe, who competed with each other in amassing vast collections of paintings and sculptures. One of those collections became the subject of a painting by Rubens and Jan Brueghel the Elder (1568–1625): Allegory of Sight (fig. 25-1a). Rubens’s many enterprises made him a rich man, able to afford a magnificent townhouse in Antwerp and a castle in the countryside. Rubens, like Raphael, was a successful and renowned artist, a con-sort of kings, a shrewd man of the world, and a learned philosopher.
25-1a Brueghel and
ruBens, Allegory of Sight, ca. 1617–1618.
Elevation of the Cross. When he was 23 years old, Rubens departed Flanders for Italy and remained there from 1600 until 1608. During these years, he studied the works of Italian Renais-sance and Baroque masters and laid the foundations of his mature style. Shortly after returning home, he painted Elevation of the Cross (fig. 25-2) for the church of Saint Walburga in Antwerp. Later moved to the city’s cathedral, the altarpiece in the form of a triptych is one of numerous commissions for religious works that Rubens received at this time. By investing in sacred art, Flemish churches sought to affirm their allegiance to Catholicism and Span-ish Habsburg rule after a period of Protestant iconoclastic fervor in the region. Rubens’s interest in Italian art, especially the works of Michel-angelo and Caravaggio, is evident in the Saint Walburga triptych. The choice of this episode from the passion cycle provided Rubens with the opportunity to depict heavily muscled men in unusual poses straining to lift the heavy cross with Christ’s body nailed to it. Here, as in his Lion Hunt (fig. I-14), Rubens, deeply impressed by Michelangelo’s heroic twisting sculpted and painted nude male igures, showed his prowess in representing foreshortened anatomy and the contortions of violent action. Rubens placed the body of Christ on the cross as a diagonal that cuts dynamically across the picture while inclining back into it. The whole composition seethes with a power that comes from strenuous exertion, from power-ful muscles taut with effort. The tension is emotional as well as physical, as reflected not only in Christ’s face but also in the fea-tures of his followers. Bright highlights and areas of deep shadow inspired by Caravaggio’s tenebrism (figs. 24-17, 24-17A, 24-17B, and 24-18), hallmarks of Rubens’s work at this stage of his career, enhance the drama. The human body in action, draped or undraped, male or
female, would remain the focus of Rubens’s art throughout his long career. This interest, combined with his voracious intellect, led Rubens to copy the works of classical antiquity and of the Italian masters. During his last two years in Rome, Rubens made many black-chalk drawings of great artworks, including figures in Michel-angelo’s Sistine Chapel frescoes (fig. 22-17) and the ancient marble group (fig. 5-89) of Laocoön and his two sons. In De imitatione statuarum (On the Imitation of Statues), a treatise Rubens wrote in Latin, the artist stated: “I am convinced that in order to achieve the highest perfection one needs a full understanding of the [ancient] statues, indeed a complete absorption in them; but one must make judicious use of them and before all avoid the effect of stone.”2
Consequences of War. Once Rubens established his repu-tation, commissions from kings, queens, dukes, and other elite patrons throughout Europe soon followed. One of these commis-sions was Consequences of War (fig. 25-3), which Rubens painted in 1638 for Ferdinando II de’ Medici, the grand duke of Tuscany (r. 1621–1670). Like Elevation of the Cross (fig. 25-2), Consequences of War is a chaotic scene filled with twisting, straining, foreshort-ened male and female bodies, but Rubens used the commission from the Medici duke as an opportunity to express his desire—as a diplomat as well as a citizen-painter—for peace in an age when war was constant. Consequences of War is a commentary on the Thirty Years’ War (see “Rubens on Consequences of War,” page 743).
25-2 Peter Paul Rubens, Elevation of the Cross, from Saint Walburga, Antwerp, 1610. Oil on wood, center panel 159 17
80 ×
119 11 159 17
20, each wing 80 × 49 110.
Antwerp Cathedral, Antwerp.
In this triptych, Rubens explored foreshortened
anatomy and violent action. The whole composition seethes with a power that comes from heroic exertion. The tension is emotional as well as physical.

Marie de’ Medici. Rubens’s interaction with royalty and aris-tocracy provided the Flemish master with an understanding of the ostentation and spectacle of Baroque (particularly Italian) art that appealed to the wealthy and privileged. Rubens, the born cour-tier, reveled in the pomp and majesty of royalty. Likewise, those in power embraced the lavish spectacle that served the Catholic Church so well in Italy. The magnificence and splendor of Baroque imagery reinforced the authority and right to rule of the highborn. Among Rubens’s royal patrons was Marie de’ Medici, a member of the famous Florentine banking family and widow of Henry IV (r. 1589–1610), the first Bourbon king of France. She commis-sioned Rubens to paint a series of huge canvases memorializing and glorifying her career. Between 1622 and 1626, Rubens, work-ing with amazing creative energy, produced with the aid of his many assistants 21 historical-allegorical pictures and three por-traits designed to hang in the queen’s new palace, the Luxembourg, in Paris. (Today, they are on display in a huge exhibition hall in the Louvre, the former palace of the kings of France.) Remark-ably, each of the paintings, although conceived as an instrument of royal propaganda to flatter the queen and impress her sub-jects and foreign envoys, is also a great work of art—a supreme testimony to Rubens’s skill and the talents of his small army of assistants.
ARTISTS ON ART rubens on Consequences of War
In the ancient and medieval worlds, artists rarely wrote commentaries on the works they produced. (The Greek sculptor Polykleitos is a nota­ ble exception; see “Polykleitos’s Prescription for the Perfect Statue,” page 131). Beginning with the Renaissance, however, the increased celebrity that artists enjoyed and the ready availability of paper encour­ aged artists to record their intentions in letters to friends and patrons. In March 1638, Peter Paul Rubens wrote a letter to Justus Suster­ mans (1597–1681), court painter of Grand Duke Ferdinando II de’ Medici of Tuscany, explaining his Consequences of War (fig. 25-3) and his attitude toward the European military conflicts of his day.
The principal figure is Mars, who has left the open temple of Janus (which in time of peace, according to Roman custom, remained closed) and rushes forth with shield and blood­stained sword, threatening the people with great disaster. He pays little heed to Venus, his mistress, who, accompanied by Amors and Cupids, strives with caresses and embraces to hold him. From the other side, Mars is dragged forward by the Fury Alekto, with a torch in her hand. Near by are monsters personifying Pestilence and Famine, those inseparable partners of War. On the ground, turning her back, lies a woman with a broken lute, representing Harmony, which is incompatible with the discord of War. There is also a mother with
her child in her arms, indicating that fecundity, procreation and char­ ity are thwarted by War, which corrupts and destroys everything. In addition, one sees an architect thrown on his back, with his instruments in his hand, to show that which in time of peace is con­ structed for the use and ornamentation of the City, is hurled to the ground by the force of arms and falls to ruin. I believe, if I remember rightly, that you will find on the ground, under the feet of Mars, a book and a drawing on paper, to imply that he treads underfoot all the arts and letters. There ought also to be a bundle of darts or arrows, with the band which held them together undone; these when bound form the symbol of Concord. Beside them is the caduceus and an olive branch, attribute of Peace; these are also cast aside. That grief­ stricken woman clothed in black, with torn veil, robbed of all her jewels and other ornaments, is the unfortunate Europe who, for so many years now, has suffered plunder, outrage, and misery, which are so injurious to everyone that it is unnecessary to go into detail. Europe’s attribute is the globe, borne by a small angel or genius, and surmounted by the cross, to symbolize the Christian world.*
Given the allegorical complexity of Consequences of War, the com­ positional unity and unbridled energy of the personified figures in the painting are all the more remarkable.
*Translated by Kristin Lohse Belkin, Rubens (London: Phaidon, 1998), 288–289. 1 ft.
25-3 Peter Paul Rubens, Consequences of War, 1638–1639. Oil on canvas, 69 90 × 119 3 7 Florence.
80. Galleria Palatina, Palazzo Pitti,
Since the Renaissance, artists have left behind many letters shedding light on their lives and work. In a 1638 letter, Rubens explained the meaning of each figure in this allegorical painting.
25-4 Peter Paul Rubens, Arrival of Marie de’ Medici at Marseilles, from the Luxembourg Palace, Paris, France, 1622–1625. Oil on canvas, 129 111 Musée du Louvre, Paris.
20 × 99 70.
Rubens painted a large series of canvases glorifying Marie de’ Medici. In this historical­ allegorical picture filled with his typically robust figures, the sea and sky rejoice at the queen’s arrival in France.
In Arrival of Marie de’ Medici at
Marseilles (fig. 25-4), a 13-foot-tall tab-leau that may be the best of the series, Marie disembarks at that southern French port after her sea voyage from Italy. An allegorical personification of France, draped in a cloak decorated with the fleur-de-lis (the floral symbol of French royalty; compare fig. 25-24), welcomes her. The sea and sky rejoice at the queen’s safe arrival. Neptune and the Nereids (daughters of the sea god Nereus) salute her, and the winged and trumpeting personified Fame swoops overhead. Conspicuous in the galley’s opulently carved stern-castle, under the Medici coat of arms, stands the commander of the vessel, the only immobile figure in the compo-sition. In black and silver, this figure makes a sharp accent amid the swirling ivory, gold, and red brushstrokes. Rubens enriched the surfaces with a decorative splendor that pulls the whole composi-tion together. The vigorous motion that customarily enlivens the painter’s typically robust figures, beginning with the muscle-bound twisting sea creatures, vibrates through the entire design. As noted, the success Rubens
enjoyed made him a wealthy man, and that in turn afforded him the opportunity late in life to choose his own subjects instead of only paint-ing those specified by his patrons. Perhaps the best example is Rubens’s Garden of Love (fig. 25-4a), which also highlights the artist’s much sub-tler coloristic late style.
1 ft.
Anthony van Dyck. Most of the leading painters of the next generation in Flanders were at one time trained or employed in Rubens’s studio. The master’s most famous pupil was Anthony van Dyck (1599–1641). Early on,
the younger man, unwill-ing to be overshadowed by Rubens’s undisputed stature, left his native Antwerp for Genoa and then London, where he became court portraitist to Charles I and was awarded a knighthood. Although van Dyck created dramatic compositions of high qual-ity, his specialty became the portrait. He developed a courtly man-ner of great elegance that influenced many artists
throughout
Europe and resounded in English portrait painting well into the 19th century. In one of his finest works, Charles I at the Hunt (fig. 25-5), the
25-4a ruBens, Garden of Love, 1630–1632.
ill-fated English king stands on a hillock with the Thames River in the background. An equerry and a page attend him. The portrait is a stylish image of relaxed authority, as if the king is out for a casual ride in his park, but no one can mistake the regal poise and the air of absolute authority that Charles’s Parliament resented and was soon to rise against. Here, the king turns his back on his attendants as he surveys his domain. Van Dyck’s placement of the monarch is exceedingly artful. He stands off center, but as the sole figure seen against the sky and with the branches of the trees pointing to him, he is the immediate focus of the viewer’s attention, whose gaze the king returns. In this masterful composition, van Dyck also managed to make Charles I, who was of short stature, seem taller than his attendants and even his horse. The painter also por-trayed the king looking down on the observer, befitting his exalted position.
Clara Peeters. Some 17th-century Flemish artists specialized in still-life painting, as did Sánchez Cotán (fig. 24-25) in Spain. A pioneer of this genre was Clara Peeters (1594–ca. 1657), a native of Antwerp who spent time in Holland and laid the groundwork for Pieter Claesz (fig. 25-1), Willem Kalf (fig. 25-22), Rachel Ruysch (fig. 25-23), and other Dutch masters of still-life painting. Peeters won renown for her depictions of food and flowers together, and for still lifes featuring bread and fruit, known as breakfast pieces. In Still Life with Flowers, Goblet, Dried Fruit, and Pretzels (fig. 25-6), Peeters’s considerable skills are evident. One of a series of four paintings, each of which depicts a typical early-17th-century meal, this breakfast piece reveals Peeters’s virtuosity in depicting a wide variety of objects convincingly, from the smooth, reflective surfaces of the glass and silver goblets to the soft petals of the blooms in the vase. Peeters often painted the objects in her still lifes against a dark background, thereby negating any sense of deep space (com-pare fig. 24-25). In this breakfast piece, she enhanced the sense of depth in the foreground by placing the leaves of the flower on the stone ledge as though they were encroaching into the viewer’s space.
25-6 Clara Peeters, Still Life with Flowers, Goblet, Dried Fruit, and Pretzels, 1611. Oil on panel, 19 7 3
40 × 29 11 Museo del Prado, Madrid.
Peeters was a pioneer of still­life painting. In this breakfast piece, she reveals her virtuosity in depicting a variety of objects. She laid the groundwork for many Dutch still­life painters.

DUTCH REPUBLIC
With the founding of the Bank of Amsterdam in 1609, Amster-dam emerged as the financial center of the Continent. In the 17th century, the city had the highest per capita income in Europe. The Dutch economy also benefited enormously from the country’s expertise on the open seas, which facilitated the establishment of lucrative trade routes to ports as far away as Japan, Africa, and South America (see “International Trade,” page 739). Due to this prosperity and in the absence of an absolute ruler, political power increasingly passed into the hands of a wealthy class of merchants and manufacturers, especially in cities such as Amsterdam, Haar-lem, and Delft (map 25-1). All of these bustling cities were located in Holland (the largest of the seven United Provinces), which explains why historians informally use the name “Holland” to refer to the entire country.
Ter Brugghen and van honthorst
Religious differences were a major consideration during the north-ern Netherlands’ insistent quest for independence in the 16th and early 17th centuries. Whereas Spain and the southern Netherlands were Catholic, the people of the northern Netherlands were pre-dominantly Protestant. The prevailing Calvinism demanded a puritanical rejection of art in churches, and thus artists produced relatively little religious art in the Dutch Republic at
this time
(especially compared with the volume of commissions created in the wake of the Counter-Reformation in areas dominated by Catholicism; see “The Council of Trent,” page 654), and all of it was intended for display in private settings instead of churches.
Hendrick ter Brugghen. One artist in the Dutch Republic who did produce a large number of religious paintings was Hendrick ter Brugghen (1588–1629) of Utrecht. He painted Calling of Saint Matthew (fig. 25-7) in 1621 after returning from a trip to Italy, selecting as his subject a theme Caravaggio had painted (fig. 24-17) for the church of San Luigi dei Francesi in Rome. The moment of the narrative that ter Brugghen chose and his naturalistic depiction of the figures echo Caravaggio’s work. But
although
ter Brugghen was an admirer of the Ital-ian master, he dispensed with Caravag-gio’s stark contrasts of dark and light and instead presented the viewer with a more colorful palette of soft tints. Further, the Dutch painter compressed the figures into a small but well-lit space, creating an inti-mate effect compared with Caravaggio’s more spacious setting, as was appropriate for a work displayed in a home instead of the grandiose chapel of a Catholic church.
25-7 Hendrick ter Brugghen, Calling of Saint Matthew, 1621. Oil on canvas, 39 40 × 49 60. Centraal Museum, Utrecht.
One Dutch artist who produced many religious paintings was Hendrick ter Brugghen, who was influenced by Caravaggio. Ter Brugghen’s paintings were displayed in private homes, not grandiose Catholic churches.
Mercantilist Patronage. Given the absence of an authoritative ruler and the Calvinist concern for the potential misuse of religious art, commissions from royalty or the Catholic Church, prominent in the art of other European countries, were uncommon in the United Provinces. With the new prosperity, however, an expanding class of merchants with different tastes emerged as art patrons. In contrast to Italian, Spanish, and Flemish Baroque art, most 17th-century Dutch paintings were genre scenes, landscapes, portraits of middle-class men and women, and still lifes, all of which appealed to the newly prosperous Dutch merchants (see “The Art Market in the Dutch Republic,” page 747).
Gerrit van Honthorst. Typical of 17th-century Dutch genre scenes is Supper Party (fig. 25-8) by Gerrit van Honthorst (1590–1656). In this painting, van Honthorst presented an informal gathering of unidealized figures. While a musician serenades the group, his companions delight in watching a young woman feeding a piece of chicken to a man whose hands are both occupied—one holds a jug and the other a glass. Van Honthorst spent several years in Italy, and while there he carefully studied Caravaggio’s work, as did fellow Utrecht painter Hendrick ter Brugghen. The Italian art-ist’s influence surfaces in the mundane tavern setting and the noc-turnal lighting of Supper Party. Fascinated by nighttime effects, van Honthorst frequently placed a hidden light source in his pictures and used it as a pretext to work with dramatic and starkly contrast-ing dark and light effects. Seemingly lighthearted genre scenes were popular in Baroque
Holland, but Dutch viewers could also interpret them moralisti-cally. For example, Supper Party can be read as a warning against the sins of gluttony (represented by the man on the right) and lust (the woman feeding the glutton is, in all likelihood, a prostitute with her aged procuress at her side). Or perhaps the painting rep-resents the loose companions of the Prodigal Son (Luke 15:13; see fig. 25-14)—panderers and prostitutes drinking, singing, strum-ming, and laughing. Strict Dutch Calvinists no doubt approved of such interpretations. Others simply took delight in the immediacy of the scenes or the skill of artists such as van Honthorst.


PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS Frans hals’s Group portraits
Portrait artists traditionally relied heavily on convention—for example, specific poses, settings, attire, and furnishings—to convey a sense of the sitter. Because the subject was usually someone of status or note, such as a pope, king, duchess, condottiere, or wealthy banker, the art­ ist’s goal was to produce an image appropriate to the subject’s station in life. With the increasing number of Dutch middle­class patrons, por­ trait painting became more challenging. The Calvinists shunned osten­ tation, instead wearing subdued and dark clothing with little variation or decoration (fig. 25­10), and the traditional conventions became inappro­ priate and thus unusable. Despite these difficulties, or perhaps because of them, Frans Hals produced lively portraits that seem far more relaxed than traditional formulaic portraiture. He injected an engaging spontane­ ity into his images and conveyed the individuality of his sitters as well. His manner of execution, using light and rapid brushstrokes, intensified the casualness, immediacy, and intimacy in his paintings. The poses of his figures, the highlights on their clothing, and their facial expressions all seem instantaneously created. Hals’s most ambitious portraits reflect the widespread popularity in the Dutch Republic of very large canvases commemorating the par­ ticipation of Dutch citizens in civic organizations. These commissions presented greater difficulties to the painter than requests to depict a single sitter. Hals rose to the challenge and achieved great success with this new portrait genre. His Archers of Saint Hadrian (fig. 25-9) is typical
25-9 Frans Hals, Archers of Saint Hadrian, ca. 1633. Oil on canvas, 69 90 × 119. Frans Halsmuseum, Haarlem.
In this brilliant compo­ sition, Hals succeeded in solving the problem of portraying each individual in a group portrait while retain­ ing action and variety in the painting as a whole.
in that the subject is one of the many Dutch civic militia groups that claimed credit for liberating the Dutch Republic from Spain. As did other companies, each year the Archers met in dress uniform for a grand ban­ quet on their saint’s feast day. The celebrations sometimes lasted an entire week, prompting an ordinance limiting them to three or four days. These events often included sitting for a group portrait. In Archers of Saint Hadrian, Hals attacked the problem of how to
represent each militia member satisfactorily yet retain action and variety in the composition. Whereas earlier group portraits in the Netherlands were rather ordered and regimented images, Hals sought to enliven the depictions. In his portrait of the Saint Hadrian militiamen, each member is both part of the troop and an individual with unique features. The sit­ ters’ movements and moods vary markedly. Some engage the viewer directly. Others look away or at a companion. Some are stern, others animated. Each archer is equally visible and clearly recognizable. The uniformity of attire—black military dress, white ruffs, and sashes—did not deter Hals from injecting spontaneity into the work. Indeed, he used those elements to create a lively rhythm extending throughout the com­ position and energizing the portrait. The impromptu effect—the preser­ vation of every detail and fleeting facial expression—is, of course, the result of careful planning. Yet Hals’s energetic brush appears to have moved instinctively, directed by a plan in his mind but not traceable in any preparatory scheme on the canvas. The result is a portrait that is less a record of “sitters posing for the painter” than it is a snapshot of a social gathering.
1 ft. hals and Leyster
Many artists, including Frans Hals (ca. 1581–1666), the lead-ing painter in Haarlem, and Judith Leyster, excelled in painting portraits, which were in high demand among the new class of art patrons in the 17th-century Dutch Republic.

Frans Hals. Those patrons included not only individuals of means, as in the past. Groups of Dutch citizens also often asked Hals to paint portraits of them. Representing the members of a group, such as the Saint Hadrian militia (fig. 25-9) or the regents of a Haarlem old men’s house (fig. 25-10), rather than separate individuals, presented a special problem for the painter, but Hals quickly became a master of the new genre of group portraiture (see “Frans Hals’s Group Portraits,” page 748). Hals’s The Women Regents of
the Old Men’s Home at Haarlem (fig. 25-10) is the finest of his group portraits of Calvinist women engaged in charitable work. Although Dutch women had pri-mary responsibility for the welfare of the family and the orderly operation of the home, they also populated the labor force in the cities. Among the more prominent roles that educated Dutch women played in public life were as regents of orphanages, hos-pitals, old age homes, and prisons. In Hals’s portrait, the Haarlem regents sit quietly in a manner becoming devout Calvinists. Unlike the more relaxed, seemingly informal character of his other group portraits, a stern, puritanical, and composed sensibil-ity suffuses Hals’s portrayal of these regents. The women—all carefully distinguished as individuals—gaze out from the painting with expressions ranging from dour disinter-est to kindly concern. The somber and virtually monochromatic (one-color) palette, punctuated only by the white accents of the clothing, contributes to the painting’s restraint. Both the coloration and the mood of Hals’s portrait are appropriate for this commission. Record-ing the likenesses of the Haarlem regents called for a very different kind of portrait than those Hals made of men at festive militia ban-quets (fig. 25-9).
1 ft.
25-10 Frans Hals, The Women Regents of the Old Men’s Home at Haarlem, 1664. Oil on canvas, 59 70 × 89 20. Frans Halsmuseum, Haarlem.
Dutch women played a major role in public life as regents of charitable institutions. A stern puritanical sensibility suffuses Hals’s group portrait of the regents of Haarlem’s old men’s home.
Judith Leyster. Some of Hals’s followers developed thriv-ing careers of their own as portraitists. One was Judith Leyster (1609–1660), who may not have been Hals’s pupil, but was a close associate who fully absorbed the master’s innovations in technique and composition. In fact, Leyster’s Self-Portrait (fig. 25-11) was once thought to have been painted by Hals himself. The canvas is detailed, precise, and accurate, but also exhibits the spontane-ity found in Hals’s works. In her self-portrait, Leyster succeeded at communicating a great deal about herself. She depicted herself as an artist, seated in front of a painting on an easel. The palette in her left hand and brush in her right announce the painting as her creation. She thus invites the viewer to evaluate her skill, which both the fiddler on the canvas and the image of herself demonstrate as considerable. Although she produced a wide range of paintings, including still lifes and floral pieces, her specialty was genre scenes such as the comic image seen on the easel. Leyster’s quick smile and relaxed pose as she stops her work to meet the viewer’s gaze reveal her self-assurance. Although presenting herself as an artist, Leyster did not paint herself wearing the traditional artist’s smock, as her more famous contemporary Rembrandt did in his 1659–1660 self-portrait (fig. 25-15). Her elegant attire distinguishes her socially as a member of a well-to-do family, another important aspect of Leyster’s identity.
1 ft.
25-11 Judith Leyster, Self-Portrait, ca. 1630. Oil on canvas, 29 5 3
80 × 29 15 Mr. and Mrs. Robert Woods Bliss).
Although presenting herself as an artist specializing in genre scenes, Leyster wears elegant attire instead of a painter’s smock, placing her socially as a member of a well­to­do family.

rembrandt Rembrandt van Rijn (1606–1669), Hals’s
younger contemporary and the leading Dutch painter of his time, was an undis-puted genius—an artist of great versatility, a master of light and shadow, and a unique interpreter of the Protestant conception of holy scripture. Born in Leiden, he moved to Amsterdam around 1631, where he could attract a more extensive clientele than possible in his native city. Rembrandt had trained as a history painter in Leiden, but in Amsterdam he immediately entered the lucrative market for portraiture and soon became renowned for that genre.
Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Tulp. In a paint-ing he completed shortly after he arrived in Amsterdam, Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nico-laes Tulp (fig. 25-12), Rembrandt deviated even further from the traditional staid group portrait than Hals did. Despite Hals’s deter-mination to enliven his portraits, he still evenly spread his subjects across the canvas. By contrast, Rembrandt chose to portray the members of the surgeons’ guild (who com-missioned this group portrait) clustered on the painting’s left side. In the foreground appears the corpse that Dr. Tulp, a noted physician, is in the act of dissecting. Rem-brandt diagonally placed and foreshortened the corpse, activating the space by disrupting the strict horizontal, planar orientation typi-cal of traditional portraiture. He depicted each of the “students” specifically, and although they wear virtually identical attire, their poses and facial expressions suggest the varying degrees of intensity with which they watch Dr. Tulp’s demonstration—or ignore it. One, at the apex of Rembrandt’s triangular composition of bodies, gazes at the viewer instead of at the operating table. Another directs his attention to the open book (an anatomy manual) at the cadaver’s feet. Rem-brandt produced this painting when he was 26 and just beginning his career. His innova-tive approach to group portraiture is there-fore all the more noteworthy.
Night Watch. Rembrandt amplified the complexity and energy of the group portrait in The Company of Captain Frans Banning Cocq (fig. 25-13), better known as Night Watch. This more commonly used title is a misnomer, however. The painting is not a nocturnal scene, nor are the figures portrayed posted on a watch in defense of their city. It features dramatic lighting, but the painting’s darkness (which explains in part the com-monly used title) is the result of the varnish
the artist used, which darkened considerably over time. It was not the painter’s intention to portray his subjects moving about at night. Night Watch was one of six paintings by different artists com-missioned by various groups around 1640 for the assembly and banquet room of Amsterdam’s new Musketeers Hall, the largest and most prestigious interior space in the city. From the limited infor-mation available about the commission, it appears that two officers, Captain Frans Banning Cocq and Lieutenant Willem van Ruyten-burch, along with 16 members of their militia, contributed to Rem-brandt’s fee. The canvas also includes 16 additional figures, among them a girl just to the left of center, whom scholars have never been able to identify, despite her prominence in the composition. Unfortunately, in 1715, when city officials moved Rembrandt’s
painting to Amsterdam’s town hall, they trimmed it on all sides (by as much as 2 feet). Even in its truncated form, The Company of Cap-tain Frans Banning Cocq is still a huge canvas (nearly 15 feet wide), but it is an incomplete record of the artist’s resolution of the chal-lenge of portraying 18 patrons at once. Rembrandt’s apparent goal was to capture the excitement and frenetic activity of men prepar-ing for a parade, and he succeeded brilliantly. Comparing this militia group portrait to Hals’s Archers of Saint Hadrian (fig. 25-9) reveals Rembrandt’s inventiveness in enlivening what was, by then, becoming a conventional format for Dutch group portraits. Rather than present assembled men posed in orderly fash-ion, the younger artist chose to portray the company members rushing about in the act of organizing themselves, thereby animating the image considerably. At the same time, he managed to record the three most important stages of using a musket—loading, firing, and readying the weapon for reloading—details that must have pleased his 18 patrons.
1 ft.
25-12 Rembrandt van Rijn, Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp, 1632. Oil on canvas, 59 3 3
40 × 79 11 40. Mauritshuis, The Hague.
In this early work, Rembrandt used an unusual composition, arranging members of Amsterdam’s surgeons’ guild clustered on one side of the painting as they watch Dr. Tulp dissect a corpse.
1 ft.
25-13 Rembrandt van Rijn, The Company of Captain Frans Banning Cocq (Night Watch), from the Musketeers Hall, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1642. Oil on canvas, 119 110 × 149 40 (trimmed from original size). Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam.
Rembrandt’s dramatic use of light contributes to the animation of this militia group portrait in which the artist showed the company members rushing to organize themselves for a parade.
25-13a remBrandt, Blinding of Samson, 1636.

MATERIALS AND TECHNIqUES rembrandt’s use of Light and Shade
Among the hallmarks of the style of Rembrandt van Rijn, the leading painter in the 17th­century Dutch Republic, is his masterful use of light and shade. Rembrandt’s pictorial method involved refining light and shade into finer and finer nuances until they blended with one another. Earlier painters’ use of abrupt lights and darks gave way, in the work of artists such as Rembrandt and Velázquez (figs. 24­29, 24­30, and 24­31), to gradation.
Although these later artists sacrificed some of the dramatic effects
of sharp chiaroscuro, a greater fidelity to appearances more than off­ sets those sacrifices. In fact, the recording of light in small gradations is closer to reality because the eye perceives light and dark not as static but as always subtly changing. In general, Renaissance artists represented forms and faces in a flat, neutral modeling light (even Leonardo’s shading is of a standard kind). They represented the idea of light, rather than showing how humans perceive light. Artists such as Rembrandt discovered gradations of light and dark
as well as degrees of differences in pose, in the movements of facial fea­ tures, and in psychic states. They arrived at these differences optically, not conceptually or in terms of some ideal. Rembrandt found that by manipulating the direction, intensity, and distance of light and shadow, and by varying the surface texture with tactile brushstrokes, he could render subtle nuances of character and mood, in both individuals and whole scenes, as in his touching portrayal of the prodigal son’s return (fig. 25-14). He discovered for the modern world that variations of light and shade, subtly modulated, can be read as emotional differences. In the visible world, light, dark, and the wide spectrum of values between the two are charged with meanings and feelings that sometimes are independent of the shapes and figures they modify. The theater and the photographic arts have used these discoveries to great dramatic effect.
what was, by then, becoming a conventional format for Dutch group portraits. Rather than present assembled men posed in orderly fash-ion, the younger artist chose to portray the company members rushing about in the act of organizing themselves, thereby animating the image considerably. At the same time, he managed to record the three most important stages of using a musket—loading, firing, and readying the weapon for reloading—details that must have pleased his 18 patrons.
Return of the Prodigal Son. The Calvinist injunction against religious art did not prevent Rembrandt from making a series of religious paintings and prints. In the Dutch Republic, paintings depicting biblical themes were not objects of devotion, but they still brought great prestige, and Rembrandt and other artists vied to dem-onstrate their ability to represent in dra-matic new ways the stories narrated in holy scripture. One of Rembrandt’s earli-est biblical paintings, Blinding of Samson (fig. 25-13a), reveals the young artist’s debt to Rubens and Caravaggio. His mature works, however, differ mark-edly from the religious art of Baroque Italy and Flanders. Rembrandt had a
25-13a remBrandt, Blinding of Samson, 1636.
1 ft.
25-14 Rembrandt van Rijn, Return of the Prodigal Son, ca. 1665. Oil on canvas, 89 80 × 69 90. State Hermitage Museum, Saint Petersburg.
In Rembrandt’s moving representation of this biblical parable, light mingled with shadow directs the viewer’s attention by illuminating the father and son while largely veiling the witnesses.

Return of the Prodigal Son. The Calvinist injunction against religious art did not prevent Rembrandt from making a series of religious paintings and prints. In the Dutch Republic, paintings depicting biblical themes were not objects of devotion, but they still brought great prestige, and Rembrandt and other artists vied to dem-onstrate their ability to represent in dra-matic new ways the stories narrated in holy scripture. One of Rembrandt’s earli-est biblical paintings, Blinding of Samson (fig. 25-13a), reveals the young artist’s debt to Rubens and Caravaggio. His mature works, however, differ mark-edly from the religious art of Baroque Italy and Flanders. Rembrandt had a special interest in probing the states of the human soul. The spiri-tual stillness of his later religious paintings is that of inward-turning contemplation, far from the choirs and trumpets and the heavenly tumult of Bernini (fig. 24-1) or Pozzo (fig. 24-24). The Dutch artist’s psychological insight and his profound sym-pathy for human affliction produced, at the end of his life, one of the most moving pictures in the history of biblical art, Return of the Prodigal Son (fig. 25-14). In this Old Testament parable, the younger of two sons leaves his home and squanders his wealth on a life of sin. When he becomes poor and hungry and sees the error of his ways, he returns home. In Rembrandt’s painting, the forgiv-ing father tenderly embraces his lost son, who crouches before him in weeping contrition, while three figures, immersed to varying degrees in the soft shadows, note the lesson of mercy. The light, everywhere mingled with shadow, directs the viewer’s attention by illuminating the father and son and largely veiling the witnesses (see “Rembrandt’s Use of Light and Shade,” page 751). Its focus is the beautiful, spiritual face of the old man. Secondarily, the light touches the contrasting stern face of the foremost witness. The painting demonstrates the degree to which Rembrandt developed a personal style completely in tune with the simple eloquence of the biblical passage.
25-15 Rembrandt van Rijn, Self-Portrait, ca. 1659–1660. Oil on canvas, 39 8 3
40 × 39 10. Kenwood House, London (Iveagh Bequest).
In this late self­portrait, Rembrandt’s interest in revealing the soul is evident in the attention given to his expressive face. The controlled use of light and the nonspecific setting contribute to this focus.
25-15a
remBrandt, Self-Portrait, 1658.

Self-Portraits. Rembrandt carried over the spiritual quality of his religious works into his later portraits (figs. 25-15 and 25-15a) using the same means—what could be called the “psychology of light.” Light and dark are not in conflict in his portraits. They are reconciled, merging softly and subtly to produce the visual equivalent of quietness. Their prevailing mood is one of tranquil meditation, of philosophical resignation, of musing recol-lection—indeed, a whole cluster of emotional tones heard only in silence. In his self-portrait now in Kenwood House (fig. 25-15),
1 ft.
the light source outside the upper left of the painting bathes the painter’s face in soft highlights, leaving the lower part of his body in shadow. The artist depicted himself as possessing dignity and strength, and the portrait serves as a summary of the many stylistic and professional concerns that occupied him throughout his career. Rembrandt’s distinctive use of light is evident, as is the assertive brushwork suggestive of his confidence and self-assurance. He here presented himself as a working artist holding his brushes, palette, and maulstick (compare fig. 23-16) and wearing his studio garb—a smock and painter’s turban. The circles on the wall behind him (the subject of much scholarly debate) may allude to a legendary sign of artistic virtuosity—the ability to draw a perfect circle freehand. Rembrandt’s abiding interest in revealing the human soul emerges here in his careful focus on his expressive visage. His controlled use of light and the nonspecific setting contribute to this focus. X-rays of the painting have revealed that Rembrandt originally depicted himself in the act of painting. His final resolution, with the viewer’s attention drawn to his face, produced a portrait not just of the artist but of the man as well. Indeed, Rembrandt’s nearly 70 self-portraits in various media have no parallel in sheer quantity. They reflect the artist’s deeply personal connection to his craft.
Etchings. Rembrandt’s virtuosity also extended to the graphic media, especially etching (see “Engraving and Etching,” page 590). Many printmakers adopted etching after its perfection early in the 17th century, because the technique affords greater freedom in drawing the design than engraving does. The etcher covers a copper plate with a layer of wax or varnish and then incises the design into this surface with a pointed tool, exposing the metal below but not cutting into its surface. Next, the artist immerses the plate in acid, which etches, or eats away, the exposed parts of the metal, acting in the same way the burin does in engraving. The wax’s softness gives etchers greater carving freedom than woodcutters and engravers have working directly in more resistant wood and metal. If Rem-brandt had never painted, he still would be acclaimed, as he princi-pally was in his lifetime, for his prints. Prints were a major source of income for Rembrandt, as they were for Albrecht Dürer, and he often reworked the plates so that they could be used to produce a new issue or edition. This constant reworking was unusual within the context of 17th-century printmaking practices.
Hundred-Guilder Print. One of Rembrandt’s most celebrated graphic works is Christ with the Sick around Him (fig. 25-16). Indeed, the title by which this print has been known since the early 18th century—the Hundred-Guilder Print—refers to the high price it brought during the artist’s lifetime. (As noted, a comfortable house could be purchased for 1,000 guilders.) Rembrandt worked on the print throughout the 1640s, and prints exist of each of the major stages of its evolution. The version illustrated here is the final stage, probably completed in 1649.
25-16 Rembrandt van Rijn, Christ with the Sick around Him (Hundred-Guilder Print), ca. 1649. Etching and engraving, 110 × 19 3 1
40.
Pierpont Morgan Library, New York. Rembrandt’s mastery of the newly perfected medium of etching is evident in his expert use of light and dark to draw attention to Christ as he preaches compassionately to the blind and lame.


Christ with the Sick demonstrates Rembrandt’s mastery of all
aspects of the printmaker’s craft, for he used both engraving and etching to depict the figures and the setting. As in his other reli-gious works, Rembrandt suffused this print with a deep and abiding piety, presenting the viewer not the celestial triumph of the Catho-lic Church but the humanity and humility of Jesus. Rembrandt’s composition expertly weaves together several epi-sodes in Matthew’s account of Christ’s ministry (see “The Life of Jesus,” pages 244–245), which is why it is known by various titles in addition to the one given here—for example, Christ Preaching and Christ Receiving the Children. Christ appears in the center preach-ing compassionately to, and simultaneously blessing, the blind, the lame, and the young, who are spread throughout the print in a daz-zling array of standing, kneeling, and lying positions. Also pres-ent is a young man in elegant garments with his head in his hand, lamenting Christ’s insistence that the wealthy need to give their possessions to the poor in order to gain entrance to Heaven. The tonal range of the print is remarkable. At the right, the figures near the city gate are in deep shadow. At the left, the figures, some rendered almost exclusively in outline, are in bright light—not the light of day but the illumina-tion radiating from Christ himself. A second, unseen source of light comes from the right and casts the shadow of the praying man’s arms and head onto Christ’s tunic. Technically, compositionally, and in terms of its humanity, Rembrandt’s Hundred-Guilder Print is his supreme achievement as a printmaker.

Cuyp and ruisdael
After gaining independence from Spain, the Dutch undertook an extensive land reclamation project lasting almost a century. Dikes and drainage systems cropped up across the countryside, affect-ing Dutch social and economic life. The marshy and swampy nature of much of the terrain made it less desirable for large-scale exploitation, so the extensive feudal landowning system elsewhere in Europe never developed in the United Provinces. Most Dutch families owned and worked their own farms, cultivating a feeling of closeness to the land. Consequently, landscape scenes abound in 17th-century Dutch art.

25-17 Aelbert Cuyp, Distant View of Dordrecht, with a Milkmaid and Four Cows, and Other Figures, late 1640s. Oil on canvas, 59 10 × 69 4 7
80. National Gallery, London.
Unlike idealized Italian Renaissance landscapes, Cuyp’s painting portrays a particular locale. The cows, shepherds, and milkmaid reflect the impor­ tance of the Dutch Republic’s dairy industry.
Aelbert Cuyp. One Dutch artist who es-tablished his reputation as a specialist in land-scape painting was Aelbert Cuyp (ca. 1620–1691). His works were the products of careful observation and a deep respect for and under-standing of Dutch topography. Distant View of Dordrecht, with a Milkmaid and Four Cows, and Other Figures (fig. 25-17) reveals Cuyp’s skillful use of the oil medium to record nature, but as was the norm at the time, Cuyp painted his canvases in his studio, not outdoors. Unlike the idealized classical landscapes in many Ital-ian Renaissance paintings, Cuyp’s Dordrecht landscape is particularized. The church in the background, for example, is a faithful representation of the city’s Grote Kerk (Great Church). The dairy cows, shepherds, and milkmaid in the foreground refer to a cor-nerstone of the Dutch economy—dairy prod-ucts such as butter and cheese, the demand for which increased with the development of urban centers. The credibility of this and sim-ilar paintings rests on Cuyp’s pristine render-ing of each detail.


Jacob van Ruisdael. Depicting the Dutch landscape with precision and sensitivity was also a specialty of Jacob van Ruisdael (ca. 1628–1682). In View of Haarlem from the Dunes at Overveen (fig. 25-18), Ruisdael provided an overarching view of this major Dutch city. The specificity of the artist’s image—the Saint Bavo church in the background, the numerous windmills that refer to the land reclamation efforts, and the figures in the foreground stretch-ing linen to be bleached (a major industry in Haarlem)—reflects the pride that Dutch painters took in recording their homeland and the activities of their fellow citizens. Nonetheless, in this paint-ing the inhabitants and dwellings are so small that they blend into the land itself, unlike the figures in Cuyp’s view of Dordrecht. More-over, the horizon line is low, so the sky fills almost three-quarters of the canvas surface, and the sun illuminates the landscape only in patches, where it has broken through the clouds above. In View of Haar-lem, Ruisdael not only captured the appearance of a specific locale but also succeeded in imbuing the work with a quiet serenity that is almost spiritual. Less typical of his work, but also one of the great landscape paintings of the 17th century, is Ruisdael’s allegorical Jewish Cemetery (fig. 25-18a).
25-18a ruisdael, Jewish Cemetery, ca. 1653–1655.
25-18 Jacob van Ruisdael, View of Haarlem from the Dunes at Overveen, ca. 1670. Oil on canvas, 19 100 × 29 10. Mauritshuis, The Hague.
In this painting, Ruisdael succeeded in capturing a specific, realistic view of Haarlem, its windmills, and Saint Bavo church, but he also imbued the landscape with a quiet serenity approaching the spiritual.


Vermeer
Although he also painted landscapes, such as View of Delft (fig. 25-18B), Johannes Vermeer (1632–1675) made his reputation as a painter of interior scenes, another popular sub-ject among middle-class patrons. These paintings offer the viewer glimpses into the private lives of pros-perous, responsible, and cultured citi-zens of the United Provinces. Despite his fame as a painter today, Vermeer derived much of his income from his work as an innkeeper and art dealer in Delft (see “The Art Market in the Dutch Republic,” page 747). He completed no more than 35 paintings that can be definitively attributed to him, and most of them were created for the same private patron. Vermeer began his career as a painter of biblical and historical themes, but soon abandoned those traditional subjects in favor of domestic scenes. Flemish artists of the 15th century also had painted domestic interiors, but sacred personages often occupied those scenes (for example, figs. 20-1 and 20-8). By contrast, Vermeer and his contemporaries composed neat, quietly opulent interiors of Dutch middle-class dwellings fea-turing women especially but also men and occasionally children engaging in house-hold tasks or at leisure.
Woman Holding a Balance. In two of Vermeer’s finest paintings—Woman Hold-ing a Balance (fig. 25-19) and The Letter (fig. 25-19a)—women are the primary occupants of the Dutch homes. Both paintings are highly idealized depictions of the social values of his day. In Woman Holding a Balance, a beautiful young woman wearing a veil and a fur-trimmed jacket stands in a room in her home. Light coming from a window illuminates the scene, as in many of the artist’s paintings (compare fig. 25-20). The woman stands before a table on which are spread her most precious possessions—pearl necklaces, gold chains, and gold coins, which reflect the sunlight that also shines on the woman’s face and the fingers of her right hand. In fact, the perspec-tive orthogonals direct the viewer’s attention neither to the woman’s head nor to her treasures but to the hand in which she holds a bal-ance for weighing gold. The scales, however, are empty—in perfect balance, the way Ignatius of Loyola advised Catholics (Vermeer was a Catholic convert in the Protestant Dutch Republic) to lead a tem-perate, self-aware life and to balance one’s sins with virtuous behav-ior. The mirror on the wall may refer to self-knowledge, but it may also symbolize, as do the pearls and gold, the sin of vanity. Bolstering that interpretation is the large framed Last Judgment painting on the back wall in which Christ, weigher of souls, appears in a golden aure-ole directly above the young woman’s head. Therefore, this serene domestic scene is pregnant with hidden meaning. The woman holds the scales in balance and contemplates the kind of life (one free from the temptations of worldly riches) that she must lead in order to be judged favorably on Judgment Day.
25-19 Johannes Vermeer, Woman Holding a Balance, ca. 1664. Oil on canvas, 19 3 7
D.C. (Widener Collection).
25-18B Vermeer, View of Delft, ca. 1661.
Vermeer’s woman holding empty scales in perfect balance, ignoring pearls and gold on the table, is probably an allegory of the temperate life. On the wall behind her is a depiction of the Last Judgment.

A SECOND OPINION
Johannes Vermeer’s Allegory of the Art of Painting
In Allegory of the Art of Painting (fig. 25-20), the work that Vermeer con­ sidered his most important (it is one of his largest and he never sold it, retaining it as a display piece in his studio), the artist himself appears with his back to the viewer. Dressed in clothing reminiscent of historical Burgundian attire, he is hard at work on a painting of the model standing before him. She wears a laurel wreath and holds a trumpet and book, traditional attributes of Clio, the muse of history. The map of the prov­ inces (an increasingly common feature of Dutch homes) on the back wall serves as yet another reference to history. As in many of Vermeer’s domestic scenes, the viewer is outside the space of the action, looking in through the drawn curtain, which also separates the artist in his studio from the rest of the house. Some art historians have suggested that the light radiating from an unseen window on the left, illuminating both the model and the canvas being painted, alludes to the light of artistic inspiration. Accordingly, many scholars have interpreted this painting as an allegory—a reference to painting inspired by history. More likely, especially given the character of Vermeer’s known paintings, which do not have historical subjects, the intended message is that art (and artists) transcend history and time. That the painting is certainly an allegorical work and not a simple genre scene is confirmed by a legal claim to the painting filed by Vermeer’s mother­in­law in 1677. When, after Vermeer’s death, 26 of his works were scheduled for sale to pay his widow’s debts, his mother­in­law argued that she had the right to withhold from auction “the piece . . . wherein the Art of Painting is portrayed.”*
*Albert Blankert, Johannes Vermeer van Delft 1632–1675 (Utrecht: Spectrum, 1975), 133, no. 51. Translated by Bob Haak, The Golden Age: Dutch Painters of the Seventeenth Century (New York: Abrams, 1984), 450.
25-19a Vermeer, The Letter, 1666.
Holding a Balance, a beautiful young woman wearing a veil and a fur-trimmed jacket stands in a room in her home. Light coming from a window illuminates the scene, as in many of the artist’s paintings (compare fig. 25-20). The woman stands before a table on which are spread her most precious possessions—pearl necklaces, gold chains, and gold coins, which reflect the sunlight that also shines on the woman’s face and the fingers of her right hand. In fact, the perspec-tive orthogonals direct the viewer’s attention neither to the woman’s head nor to her treasures but to the hand in which she holds a bal-ance for weighing gold. The scales, however, are empty—in perfect balance, the way Ignatius of Loyola advised Catholics (Vermeer was a Catholic convert in the Protestant Dutch Republic) to lead a tem-perate, self-aware life and to balance one’s sins with virtuous behav-ior. The mirror on the wall may refer to self-knowledge, but it may also symbolize, as do the pearls and gold, the sin of vanity. Bolstering that interpretation is the large framed Last Judgment painting on the back wall in which Christ, weigher of souls, appears in a golden aure-ole directly above the young woman’s head. Therefore, this serene domestic scene is pregnant with hidden meaning. The woman holds the scales in balance and contemplates the kind of life (one free from the temptations of worldly riches) that she must lead in order to be judged favorably on Judgment Day.
1 ft.
25-20 Johannes Vermeer, Allegory ofthe Art ofPainting, 1670–1675. Oil on canvas, 49 40 × 39 80. Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
Vermeer’s model wears a laurel wreath and holds a trumpet and book, traditional attributes of Clio, the muse of history. The light illuminating her may allude to the light of artistic inspiration.


Allegory of the Art of Painting. Vermeer, like Rembrandt, was a master of pictorial light and used it with immense virtuosity, as he did in his most complex and intriguing painting, Allegory of the Art of Painting (see “Johannes Vermeer’s Allegory of the Art of Paint-ing,” page 755). He could render space so convincingly through his depiction of light that in his works, the picture surface functions as an invisible glass pane through which the viewer looks into the con-structed illusion. Art historians believe that Vermeer used as tools both mirrors and the camera obscura, an ancestor of the modern camera based on passing light through a tiny pinhole or lens to proj-ect an image on a screen or the wall of a room. (In later versions, art-ists projected the image on a ground-glass wall of a box the opposite wall of which contained the pinhole or lens.) Vermeer did not simply copy the camera’s image, however. Instead, the camera obscura and the mirrors helped him obtain results that he reworked composition-ally, enabling him to achieve, for example, a beautiful stability of rec-tilinear shapes by carefully positioning the figures and furniture in a room. Vermeer’s compositions evoke a matchless classical serenity. Enhancing this quality are colors so true to the optical facts and
1 ft.
so subtly modulated that they suggest that Vermeer was far ahead of his time in color science. For example, Vermeer realized that shad-ows are not colorless and dark, that adjoining colors affect each other, and that light is composed of colors. Thus he painted reflections off of surfaces in colors modified by others nearby. Some scholars have suggested that Vermeer also perceived the phenomenon that modern photographers call “circles of confusion,” which appear on out-of-focus negatives. Vermeer could have seen them in images projected by the camera obscura’s primitive lens. He approximated these effects with light dabs that, in close view, give the impression of an image slightly “out of focus.” When the observer draws back a step, however, as if adjusting the lens, the color spots cohere, giving an astonishingly accurate illusion of the third dimension.
Steen
Whereas Vermeer’s paintings reveal the charm and beauty of Dutch domesticity, the works of Jan Steen (ca. 1625–1679) provide a counterpoint. In Feast of Saint Nicholas (fig. 25-21), instead of depicting a tidy, calm Dutch household, Steen opted for a scene of chaos and disruption. Saint Nicholas has just visited this residence, and the children are in an uproar as they search their shoes for the Christmas gifts he has left. Steen masterfully recorded the children’s personalities. Some of them are delighted. The little girl in the center clutches her gifts, clearly unwilling to share with the other children despite her mother’s pleas. Others are disappointed. The boy on the left is in tears because he received only a birch rod. An appropriately festive atmosphere reigns, which contrasts sharply with the decorum prevailing in Vermeer’s works. Like the paintings of other Dutch artists, Steen’s lively scenes often take on an allegori-cal dimension and moralistic tone. Steen frequently used children’s activities as satirical comments on foolish adult behavior. Feast of Saint Nicholas is not his only allusion to selfishness, pettiness, and jealousy.
25-21 Jan Steen, Feast of Saint Nicholas, ca. 1660–1665. Oil on canvas, 29 8 1
40 × 29 3 3 40. Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam.
Steen’s lively scene of Dutch children discovering their Christmas gifts may also have an allegorical dimension. Feast of Saint Nicholas probably alludes to selfishness, pettiness, and jealousy.
Kalf and ruysch
As already discussed (see “The Art Market,” page 747), the rise of a new class of art patrons in the Dutch Republic prompted artists to focus on a new range of subjects. Still-life painting was one of the most popu-lar. The leading Dutch practitioners of this genre were Pieter Claesz, Willem Kalf (fig. 25-22), and Rachel Ruysch (fig. 25-23). Often, these still-life paintings had a double appeal to Dutch patrons as celebrations of their prosperity and as reminders of the transience of life. Claesz’s Vanitas Still Life (fig. 25-1) is a prime example.
Willem Kalf. As Dutch prosperity increased, precious objects and luxury items made their way into still-life paintings in great numbers. Still Life with a Late Ming Ginger Jar (fig. 25-22) by Willem Kalf (1619–1693) reflects both the wealth that Dutch citizens had accrued and the painter’s exquisite skills, both techni-cal and aesthetic. Kalf highlighted the breadth of Dutch maritime trade through his depiction of the Persian floral carpet, the Chi-nese jar used to store ginger (a luxury item), and the Mediterranean orange and peeled lemon (see “International Trade,” page 739). He delighted in recording the lustrous sheen of fabric and the light glinting off reflective surfaces. As is evident in this image, Kalf’s works present an array of ornamental objects, such as the Venetian and Dutch glassware and the silver plate. The inclusion of the watch suggests that this work, like Claesz’s Vanitas Still Life (fig. 25-1), may also be a vanitas painting, if less obviously so.
Rachel Ruysch. As living objects that soon die, flowers, partic-ularly cut blossoms, appeared frequently in vanitas paintings. How-ever, floral painting as a distinct genre also enjoyed great popularity in the Dutch Republic because the Dutch were the leading growers and exporters of flowers in 17th-century Europe. One of the major practitioners of flower painting was Rachel Ruysch (1664–1750), who from 1708 to 1716 served as court painter to the elector Palatine (the ruler of the Palatinate, a former division of Bavaria) in Düsseldorf, Germany. Ruysch’s father was a professor of botany and anatomy, which may account for her interest in and knowledge of plants and insects. She acquired an international reputation for her lush paintings, and was able to charge very high prices for her work. Flower Still Life (fig. 25-23) is one of her finest paintings. In this canvas, the floral arrangement is so full, many of the blossoms seem to be spilling out of the vase. However, Ruysch’s floral still lifes are not pictures of real floral arrangements, but idealized groupings of individually studied flowers, often combining perfect specimens of flowers that bloomed at different times of the year and could never be placed on a table at the same time. Her careful composi-tion of the individual elements in the illustrated example is evident in her arrangement of the flowers to create a diagonal running from the lower left to the upper right corner of the canvas, offsetting the opposing diagonal of the table edge.
25-22 Willem Kalf, Still Life with a Late Ming Ginger Jar, 1669. Oil on canvas, 29 60 × 29 13
40. Indianapolis Museum of Art, Indianapolis
(gift in commemoration of the 60th anniversary of the Art Association of Indianapolis, in memory of Daniel W. and Elizabeth C. Marmon).
The opulent objects, especially the Persian carpet and Chinese jar, attest to the prosperous Dutch maritime trade. Kalf’s inclusion of a watch suggests that this painting may be a vanitas still life.
25-23 Rachel Ruysch, Flower Still Life, after 1700. Oil on canvas, 29 5 3
40 × 19 117 from the Libbey Endowment, gift of Edward Drummond Libbey).
Flower paintings were very popular in the Dutch Republic. Ruysch achieved international renown for her lush paintings of floral arrangements, noted also for their careful compositions.

FRANCE
In France, monarchical authority had been increasing for centuries, culminating in the reign of Louis XIV (r. 1643–1715), who sought to determine the direction of French society and culture. Although its economy was not as expansive as the Dutch Republic’s, France became Europe’s largest and most powerful nation in the 17th cen-tury. Against this backdrop, the arts flourished.
Louis XiV
The preeminent French art patron of the 17th century was King Louis XIV himself. Determined to consolidate and expand his power, Louis was a master of political strategy and propaganda. He established a carefully crafted and nuanced relationship with the nobility, granting them sufficient benefits to keep them pacified but simultaneously maintaining rigorous control to avoid insur-rection or rebellion. He also ensured subservience by anchoring his rule in divine right (belief in a king’s absolute power as God’s will), rendering Louis’s authority incontestable. So convinced was Louis of his importance and centrality to the French king-dom that he eagerly adopted the title “le Roi Soleil” (“the Sun King”). Like the planets and the sun, all of France revolved around Louis XIV. The Sun King’s desire for control extended to all realms of
French life, including art. Louis and his principal adviser, Jean-Bap-tiste Colbert (1619–1683), strove to organize art and architecture in the service of the state. They fully appreciated the power of art as propaganda and the value of visual imagery for cultivating a pub-lic persona, and they spared no expense to raise great monuments celebrating the king’s absolute power. Louis and Colbert sought to regularize taste and establish the classical style as the preferred French manner. The founding of the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture in 1648 served to advance this goal.
Portraiture. Louis XIV maintained a workshop of painters, each with a specialization—for example, faces, fabric, architecture, land-scapes, armor, or fur. Thus many of the king’s portraits were a group effort. Louis XIV (fig. 25-24) by Hyacinthe Rigaud (1659–1743) is probably largely the work of his assistants, but he designed the composition and painted the king’s face himself—on paper, affixed to the canvas after the rest of the painting was complete. Rigaud’s portrait successfully conveys the image of an absolute monarch. The king, age 63 when he commissioned this portrait, stands with his left hand on his hip and gazes directly at the viewer. His elegant ermine-lined fleur-de-lis coronation robes (compare fig. 25-4) hang loosely from his left shoulder, suggesting an air of haughti-ness. Louis also draws his garment back to expose his legs. (The king was a ballet dancer in his youth and was proud of his well-toned legs.) The portrait’s majesty derives in large part from the composition. The Sun King is the unmistakable focal point of the image, and Rigaud placed him so that he seems to look down on the viewer. (Louis XIV was only 5 feet, 4 inches tall—a fact that drove him to design the red high-heeled shoes he wears in this painting.) The carefully detailed environment in which the king stands also contributes to the portrait’s stateliness and grandiosity, as does the painting’s sheer size (more than 9 feet tall). Rigaud’s portrait was originally intended as a gift to Louis’s
grandson, Philip V of Spain, but the Sun King was so pleased with it that he kept it for his own collection. Only three years later did Louis commission Rigaud to produce a copy for Philip. The image soon became iconic, and Rigaud’s studio produced more copies for various European aristocrats.
The Louvre. The first great architectural project that Louis XIV and his adviser Colbert undertook was the closing of the east side of the Louvre’s Cour Carrée (fig. 23-23), left incomplete by Pierre Lescot in the 16th century. The king invited the renowned Roman architect and sculptor Gian Lorenzo Bernini to come to Paris to submit a proposal, but Bernini envisioned an Italian palace on a grandiose scale, which would have involved the demolition of all previous work. His plan rejected, Bernini indignantly returned home. Louis then turned to three French architects—Claude Perrault (1613–1688), Louis Le Vau (1612–1670), and Charles Le Brun (1619–1690)—for the Louvre’s east facade (fig. 25-25). The design is a brilliant synthesis of French and Italian classical ele-ments, culminating in a new and definitive formula. The facade has a central section in the form of a Corinthian temple front with a giant colonnade of paired columns on each side. Together, the three sections resemble a classical temple with its sides folded out like wings. At the corners of the facade are projecting units with engaged Corinthian columns and pilasters resting on a stately podium. The designers favored an even roofline, balustraded and broken only by the central pediment, over the traditional French pyramidal roof of the Louvre’s west wing (fig. 23-23). The emphatically horizon-tal sweep of the 17th-century facade brushed aside all memory of Gothic verticality. The stately proportions and monumentality of the Baroque design were both an expression of the new offi-cial French taste and a sym-bol of centrally organized authority.
25-24 Hyacinthe Rigaud, Louis XIV, 1701. Oil on canvas, 99 20 × 69 30. Musée du Louvre, Paris.
In this portrait set against a stately backdrop, Rigaud portrayed the 59 40 Sun King wearing red high­heeled shoes and with his ermine­lined corona­ tion robes thrown over his left shoulder
25-25 Claude Perrault, Louis Le Vau, and Charles Le Brun, east facade of the Louvre (looking southwest), Paris, France, 1667–1670.
The design of the Louvre’s east facade is a brilliant synthesis of French and Italian classical elements, including a central projecting section resembling an ancient temple front with a pediment.
ART AND SOCIETy
The Sun King’s palace at Versailles To realize his vision of a grandiose palace worthy of a “Sun King,” Louis XIV assembled a veritable army of architects, decorators, sculptors, paint­ ers, and landscape designers under the general management of Charles Le Brun to design and construct his new royal residence at Versailles (fig. 25-26). At the king’s direction, Le Brun and his team converted the remodeling of a simple hunting lodge into the greatest architectural project of the age—a defining statement of French Baroque style and a grandiose symbol of Louis XIV’s power and ambition. Planned on a gigantic scale, the project called not only for a large palace flanking a vast park but also for the construction of a satellite city to house court and government officials, military and guard detach­ ments, courtiers, and servants (thereby keeping them all under the king’s close supervision). Le Brun laid out this town to the east of the palace along three radial avenues that converge on the palace. Their axes, in a symbolic assertion of the ruler’s absolute power over his domains, intersected in the king’s spacious bedroom, which served as an official audience chamber. The palace itself, more than a quarter­mile long, is perpendicular to the dominant east–west axis running through the associated city and park. Every detail of the extremely rich decoration of the palace’s inte­
rior received careful attention. The architects and decorators designed everything from wall paintings to doorknobs in order to reinforce the splendor of Versailles and to exhibit the very finest sense of artisanship.
Of the literally hundreds of rooms within the palace, the most famous is the Galerie des Glaces, or Hall of Mirrors (fig. 25­27), designed by Jules hardouin-mansart (1646–1708) and Le Brun. This hall over­ looks Le Nôtre’s park (fig. 25­26) from the second floor and extends along most of the width of the central block. Although deprived of its original furniture, which included gold and silver chairs and bejeweled trees, the 240­foot­long Galerie des Glaces retains much of its splen­ dor today. Hundreds of mirrors, set into the wall opposite the win­ dows, alleviate the hall’s tunnel­like quality and illusionistically extend the width of the room. The mirror, that ultimate source of illusion, was a favorite element of Baroque interior design. Here, it also enhanced the dazzling extravagance of the great festivals that Louis XIV was so fond of hosting. From the Galerie des Glaces, the king and his guests could enjoy a sweeping vista down the tree­lined central axis of the Versailles park and across terraces, lawns, pools, and lakes toward the horizon. As a symbol of absolute power, Versailles has no equal. It also
expresses, in the grandiose terms of its age, the rationalistic creed—based on scientific advances, such as the physics of Sir Isaac New­ ton (1642–1727) and the mathematical philosophy of René Descartes (1596–1650)—that all knowledge must be systematic and all science must be the consequence of the intellect imposed on matter. The majestic and rational design of Versailles proudly proclaims the mastery of human intelligence (and the mastery of Louis XIV) over the disorderli­ ness of nature.
25-26 Jules Hardouin-Mansart, Charles Le Brun, and André le Nôtre, aerial view of the palace and gardens (looking northwest), Versailles, France, begun 1669. Louis XIV ordered his architects to convert a royal hunting lodge at Versailles into a gigantic palace and park. The associated satellite city has three radial avenues whose axes intersect in the Sun King’s bedroom.

Versailles. Work on the
Louvre had barely begun when Louis XIV decided to convert a royal hunting lodge at Versailles, south of Paris, into a great palace (see “The Sun King’s Palace at Versailles,” page 759, and figs. 25-26 and 25-27). The enormous palace might appear unbearably ostentatious were it not for its extraordi-nary setting in a vast park, which makes the palace seem almost an adjunct. The park of Versailles must rank among the world’s great-est artworks in both size and concept. Here, André Le Nôtre (1613–1700) transformed an entire forest into a park. Although its geometric plan may appear stiff and formal, the park in fact offers an almost unlimited assortment of vistas, as the French architect used not only the multiplicity of natural forms but also the terrain’s slightly rolling contours with stunning effectiveness. The formal gardens near the pal-ace provide a transition from the fro-zen architectural forms to the natural living ones. Here, the elegant shapes of trimmed shrubs and hedges define the tightly designed geometric units. Each unit is different from its neighbor and has a focal point in the form of a sculp-tured group, a pavilion, a reflecting pool, or a fountain. Farther away from the palace, the design loosens as trees, in shadowy masses, screen or frame views of open countryside. Le Nôtre carefully composed all vistas for maximum effect. Light and shadow, formal and informal, dense growth and open meadows—all play against one another in unend-ing combinations and variations. No photograph or series of pho-tographs can reveal the design’s full richness. The park unfolds itself only to those walking through it. In this respect, it is a temporal artwork. Its aspects change with the time of day, the seasons, and the relative position of the observer.

25-27 Jules Hardouin-Mansart and Charles Le Brun, Galerie des Glaces (Hall of Mirrors), palace of Versailles, Versailles, France, ca. 1680.
In this grandiose hall overlooking the park of the Sun King’s palace at Versailles, hundreds of mirrors illusionistically extend the room’s width and once reflected its gilded and jeweled furnishings.
25-28 François Girardon and Thomas Regnaudin, Apollo Attended by the Nymphs of Thetis, Grotto of Thetis, park of Versailles, Versailles, France, 1664–1670. Marble, life-size.
Girardon’s study of ancient sculpture and poussin’s figural compositions influenced the design of this mythological group. apollo, often equated with the sun, alludes to Louis XIV, the Sun King.
Grotto of Thetis. Scattered through the vast Versailles park are allegorical references to the Sun King in the form of statues of the Greek god Apollo, who was often identified with the sun (see “The Gods and Goddesses of Mount Olympus,” page 107). Perhaps the finest of these is Apollo Attended by the Nymphs of Thetis (fig. 25-28) by François Girardon (1628–1715) with addi-tional statues by Thomas Regnaudin (1622–1706), which
in the 18th
25-28a roBert, Baths of Apollo, Versailles, 1777–1781.
century were moved by Hubert Robert (1773–1808) to an artificial grotto above a dramatic waterfall (fig. 25-28a). Both stately and grace-ful, the nymphs have a compelling charm as they minister to Apollo at
the end of the day. Girardon, who also won the commission to make a bronze equestrian statue of the Sun King, had spent time in Rome, and his close study of Greco-Roman sculpture heavily influ-enced his design of the central group. (Girardon based his Apollo on one of the most famous ancient statues then known, the Apollo Belvedere [not illustrated] in the Vatican.) The figural compositions of the most renowned French painter of the era, Nicolas Poussin (fig. 25-31), inspired Girardon’s arrangement of the statues as a group. The sculptor’s classical style and mythological symbolism well suited France’s glorification of royal majesty.
Royal Chapel. In 1698, Hardouin-Mansart received the com-mission to add a Royal Chapel to the Versailles palace complex. The chapel’s interior (fig. 25-29) is essentially rectangular, but because its apse is as high as the nave, the fluid central space takes on a curved, Baroque quality. However, the light entering through the large clerestory windows lacks the directed dramatic effect of the Italian Baroque, instead illuminating the interior’s precisely chiseled details brightly and evenly. Pier-supported arcades carry a majes-tic row of Corinthian columns defining the royal gallery. The royal pew is at the rear, accessible directly from the king’s apartments. Amid the restrained decoration, only the illusionistic ceiling paint-ings, added in 1708 and 1709 by Antoine Coypel (1661–1722), suggest the drama and complexity of Italian Baroque art.
Église du Dôme, Paris. Another of Hardouin-Mansart’s master-works, the Église du Dôme (fig. 25-30), or Church of the Invalides, in Paris, also marries the Italian Baroque and French classical architectural styles. An intricately composed domed square of great scale, the church adjoins the veterans hospital that Louis XIV established for the disabled soldiers of his many wars. Two firmly separated levels, the upper one capped by a pediment, compose the frontispiece. The grouping of the orders and of the bays they frame is not unlike that in Italian Baroque architecture but with-out the dramatic play of curved surfaces characteristic of many 17th-century Italian churches—for example, Borromini’s San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane (fig. 24-8) in Rome. The compact facade is low and narrow in relation to the vast drum and dome, seeming to serve simply as a base for them. The overpowering dome, con-spicuous on the Parisian skyline, is itself expressive of the Baroque love for dramatic magnitude, as is the way its designer aimed for theatrical effects of light and space. The dome consists of three shells, the lowest cut off so that a visitor to the interior looks up through it to the one above, which is filled with light from hid-den windows in the third, outermost dome. Charles de La Fosse (1636–1716) painted the second dome in 1705 with an Italian-inspired representation of the heavens opening up to receive Saint Louis, patron of France (see “Louis IX, the Saintly King,” page 398).
25-29 Jules Hardouin-Mansart, interior of the Royal Chapel, with ceiling decorations by Antoine Coypel, palace of Versailles, Versailles, France, 1698–1710.
Because the apse is as high as the nave, the central space of the Royal Chapel at Versailles has a curved, Baroque quality. Louis XIV could reach the royal pew directly from his apartments.
25-30 Jules Hardouin-Mansart, Église du Dôme (looking north), Church of the Invalides, Paris, France, 1676–1706.
Hardouin­Mansart’s church marries the Italian and French architectural styles. The grouping of the orders is similar to the Italian Baroque manner but without the dramatic play of curved surfaces.

ARTISTS ON ART poussin’s notes for a Treatise on painting
As the leading champion of classical painting in 17th­century Rome, Nicolas Poussin outlined the principles of classicism in notes for an intended treatise on painting, left incomplete at his death. In those notes, Poussin described the essential ingredients necessary to pro­ duce a beautiful painting in the “grand manner”:
The grand manner consists of four things: subject­matter or theme, thought, structure, and style. The first thing that, as the foundation of all others, is required, is that the subject­matter shall be grand, as are battles, heroic actions, and divine things. But assuming that the subject on which the painter is laboring is grand, his next consider­ ation is to keep away from minutiae . . . [and paint only] things mag­ nificent and grand . . . Those who elect mean subjects take refuge in them because of the weakness of their talents.*
The idea of beauty does not descend into matter unless this is prepared as carefully as possible. This preparation consists of
three things: arrangement, measure, and aspect or form. Arrange­ ment means the relative position of the parts; measure refers to their size; and form consists of lines and colors. Arrangement and relative position of the parts and making every limb of the body hold its natural place are not sufficient unless measure is added, which gives to each limb its correct size, proportionate to that of the whole body [compare “Polykleitos’s Prescription for the Perfect Statue,” page 131], and unless form joins in, so that the lines will be drawn with grace and with a harmonious juxtaposition of light and shadow.†
Poussin applied these principles in paintings such as Et in Arcadia
Ego (fig. 25­31), a work peopled with perfectly proportioned statuesque figures attired in antique garb.
*Translated by Robert Goldwater and Marco Treves, eds., Artists on Art, 3d ed. (New York: Pantheon Books, 1958), 155. †
Ibid., 156. 1 ft. 25-31 Nicolas Poussin, Et in Arcadia Ego, ca. 1655. Oil on canvas, 29 100 × 49. Musée du Louvre, Paris.
Poussin was the leading champion of classicism in 17th­century Rome. His “grand manner” paintings are models of “arrangement and measure” and incorporate figures inspired by ancient statuary.
25-32 Nicolas Poussin, Landscape with Saint John on Patmos, 1640. Oil on canvas, 39 3 1
20 × 49 5 5 80.
Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago (A. A. Munger Collection).
Poussin placed Saint John in a classical landscape amid broken columns, an obelisk, and a ruined temple, suggest­ ing the decay of great civiliza­ tions and the coming of the new Christian era.
poussin and Claude Lorrain
Louis XIV’s embrace of classicism enticed many French artists to study Rome’s ancient and Renaissance monuments. But even before the Sun King ascended to the throne in 1643, Nicolas Poussin (1594–1665) of Normandy had spent most of his life in Rome, where he produced grandly severe paintings modeled on those of Titian and Raphael. He also carefully formulated a theoreti-cal explanation of his method and was ultimately responsible for establishing classical painting as an important ingredient of 17th-century French art (see “Poussin’s Notes for a Treatise on Paint-ing,” page 762). His classical style presents a striking contrast to the contemporaneous Baroque style of his Italian counterparts in
Rome, underscoring the multifaceted character of European art of this era.
Et in Arcadia Ego. Poussin’s Et in Arcadia Ego (Even in Arcadia, I [am present]; fig. 25-31) exemplifies the “grand manner” of paint-ing that the artist advocated. It features a lofty subject rooted in the classical world and figures based on antique statuary. Rather than depicting dynamic movement and intense emotions, as his Italian contemporaries in Rome did, Poussin emulated the rational order and stability of Raphael’s paintings. Dominating the foreground are three shepherds living in the idyllic land of Arcadia. They study an inscription on a tomb as a statuesque female figure quietly places her hand on the shoulder of one of them. She may be the spirit of death, reminding these mortals, as does the inscription, that death is found even in Arcadia, supposedly a spot of paradisiacal bliss. The countless draped female statues surviving in Italy from Roman times supplied the models for this figure, and the posture of the youth with one foot resting on a boulder derives from Greco-Roman statues of Neptune, the sea god, leaning on his trident. The classically compact and bal-anced grouping of the figures, the even light, and the thoughtful and reserved mood complement Poussin’s classical figure types.
Saint John on Patmos. In Et in Arcadia Ego, statuesque fig-ures dominate the landscape setting, but the natural world looms large in many of Poussin’s paintings. Landscape with Saint John on Patmos (fig. 25-32) is one of a pair of canvases that Poussin painted for Gian Maria Roscioli (d. 1644), secretary to Pope Urban VIII. The second landscape (not illustrated) represents Saint Matthew, reclining in right profile, who faced Saint John when the two can-vases, now in different museums on different continents, hung side by side in Rome. An eagle stands behind John, just as an angel, Matthew’s attribute, stands beside the former tax collector (see “The Four Evangelists,” page 331). John, near the end of his life on the Greek island of Patmos, composed the book of Revelation, his account of the end of the world and the Second Coming of Christ, a prophetic vision of violent destruction and the Last Judgment (see
“Early Christian Saints,” pages 246–247). 
Poussin’s setting, however, is a serene classical landscape
beneath a sunny sky. (He created a similar setting in Burial of Phocion [fig. 25-32a], which he painted later in the decade.) Saint John reclines in the foreground, posed like a Greco-Roman river god, amid shattered columns and a ped-estal for a statue that disappeared long ago. In the middle ground, two oak trees frame the ruins of a clas-sical temple and an Egyptian obe-25-32a Poussin, Burial of Phocion, 1648.
lisk, many of which the Romans brought to their capital from the Nile and the popes reused in their building projects—for example, in the piazza in front of Saint Peter’s (fig. 24-4) and in Bernini’s Foun-tain of the Four Rivers (fig. 24-7). The decaying buildings suggest the decline of great empires—to be replaced by Christianity in a new
era. In the distance are hills, sky, and clouds, all of which Poussin represented with pristine clarity, ignoring the rules of atmospheric perspective. His landscapes are not portraits of specific places, as are the Dutch landscapes of Ruisdael (fig. 25-18) and Vermeer (fig. 25-18B). Rather, they are imaginary settings constructed according to classical rules of design. Poussin’s clouds, for example, echo the contours of his hills.
Claude Lorrain. Claude Gellée, called Claude Lorrain (1600–1682) after his birthplace in the duchy of Lorraine, which was tech-nically independent from the French monarchy during this period, rivaled Poussin in fame. Claude modulated in a softer style Pous-sin’s disciplined rational art, with its sophisticated revelation of the geometry of landscape. Unlike the figures in Poussin’s pictures, those in Claude’s landscapes tell no dramatic story, point out no moral, praise no hero, and celebrate no saint. Indeed, the figures in Claude’s paintings often appear to be added as mere excuses for the radiant landscape itself. For the French artist, painting involved essentially one theme—the beauty of a broad sky suffused with the golden light of dawn or sunset glowing through a hazy atmosphere and reflecting brilliantly off rippling water.
1 ft.
25-33 Claude Lorrain, Landscape with Cattle and Peasants, 1629. Oil on canvas, 39 60 × 49 10 1 of Art, Philadelphia (George W. Elkins Collection).
20. Philadelphia Museum
Claude used atmospheric and linear perspective to transform the rustic Roman countryside filled with peasants and animals into an ideal classical landscape bathed in sunlight in infinite space.


In Landscape with Cattle and Peasants (fig. 25-33), the figures in
the right foreground chat in animated fashion. In the left foreground, cattle relax contentedly. In the middle ground, cattle amble slowly away. The well-defined foreground, distinct middle ground, and dim background recede in serene orderliness, until all form dissolves in a luminous mist. Atmospheric and linear perspective reinforce each other to turn a vista into a typical Claudian vision, an ideal classical world bathed in sunlight in infinite space (compare fig. I-12). Claude’s formalizing of nature with balanced groups of archi-tectural masses, screens of trees, and sheets of water followed the great tradition of classical landscape. It began with the backgrounds of Venetian paintings (figs. 22-30, 22-31, and 22-32) and con-tinued in the art of Annibale Carracci (fig. 24-15) and Poussin (figs. 25-32 and 25-32A). Yet Claude, like the Dutch painters, studied the light and the atmospheric nuances of nature, mak-ing an important contribution. He recorded carefully in hundreds of sketches the look of the Roman countryside, its gentle terrain accented by stone-pines, cypresses, and poplars and by the ever-present ruins of ancient aqueducts, tombs, and towers. He made these the fundamental elements of his compositions. Claude’s land-scapes owe their timeless appeal to the distinctive combination of the natural beauty of the outskirts of Rome and the mystique of the past. Claude achieved his marvelous effects of light by painstakingly
placing on his canvas tiny brushstrokes representing small value gradations, which imitated, though on a very small scale, the range of values of outdoor light and shade. Avoiding the problem of high-noon sunlight overhead, Claude preferred, and convincingly ren-dered, the sun’s rays as they gradually illuminated the morning sky or, with their dying glow, set the pensive mood of evening. Thus he matched the moods of nature with those of human subjects. Claude’s infusion of nature with human feeling and his recomposi-tion of nature in a calm equilibrium greatly appealed to many land-scape painters of the 18th and early 19th centuries.
Le nain, Callot, La Tour
Although classicism was an important element of French art dur-ing the 17th and early 18th centuries, not all artists embraced the
“grand manner.” The works of Louis Le Nain (ca. 1593–1648) have more in common with contemporaneous Dutch art than with Renaissance or ancient art. Nevertheless, subjects that in Dutch painting were opportunities for boisterous good humor (fig. 25-21), Le Nain treated with somber stillness. Family of Country People (fig. 25-34) reflects the thinking of 17th-century French social theorists who celebrated the natural virtue of peasants who worked the soil. Le Nain’s painting expresses the grave dignity of one peas-ant family made stoic and resigned by hardship. These drab country folk surely had little reason for merriment. The peasant’s lot, never easy, was miserable during the Thirty Years’ War. The anguish and frustration of the peasantry, suffering from the cruelty of unruly armies living off the countryside, often erupted in violent revolts that the same armies savagely suppressed. This family, however, is pious, docile, and calm. Because Le Nain depicted peasants with dignity and quiet resignation, despite their harsh living conditions, some scholars have suggested that he intended his paintings to please wealthy urban patrons, who preferred to think that the peas-ants were content with their lot.
Jacques Callot. Two other prominent artists from Lorraine were Jacques Callot and Georges de La Tour. Jacques Callot (ca. 1592–1635) conveyed a sense of military life during these trou-bled times in a series of prints called Miseries of War. Callot confined himself almost exclusively to the art of etching and was widely influ-ential. Rembrandt was among those who knew and learned from his work. Callot developed a very hard surface for the copper plate to enable fine and precise delineation with the needle. His quick, vivid touch and faultless drawing produced panoramas sparkling with sharp details of life—and death—despite their small size (roughly 4 by 7 inches). In the Miseries of War series, he observed these details coolly, presenting without comment images based on events that he must have witnessed in the wars in Lorraine. In Hanging Tree (fig. 25-35), Callot depicted a mass execution
of thieves (identified in the text at the bottom of the etching). The event takes place in the presence of a disciplined army, drawn up on parade with banners, muskets, and lances, their tents in the back-ground. Hanged men sway in clusters from the branches of a huge cross-shaped tree. A monk climbs a ladder, holding up a crucifix to a man while the executioner adjusts the noose around the man’s neck. At the foot of the ladder, another victim kneels to receive absolution. Under the crucifix-tree, men roll dice on a drumhead, hoping to win the belongings of the executed. (This may be an allusion to the soldiers who cast lots for the garments of the crucified Christ.) In the right foreground, a hooded priest consoles a bound man. Callot’s Miseries of War etchings are among the first realistic pictorial records of the human tragedy of armed conflict.



25-34 Louis Le Nain, Family of Country People, ca. 1640. Oil on canvas, 39 80 × 59 20. Musée du Louvre, Paris.
Le Nain’s painting expresses the grave dignity of a peas­ ant family made stoic by hardship. It reflects 17th­ century French social theory, which celebrated the natural virtue of those who worked the soil.
25-35 Jacques Callot, Hanging Tree, from the Miseries of War series, 1629–1633. Etching, 3 3 nationale de France, Paris.
40 × 7 1 40. Bibliothèque
Callot’s Miseries of War etchings were among the first realistic pictorial records of the human disaster of military conflict. Hanging Tree depicts a mass execution of thieves in the presence of an army.

Georges de La Tour. France, unlike the Dutch Republic, was a Catholic country, and religious themes, although not as common as in Italian and Spanish Baroque art, occupied some 17th-century French painters. Among the French artists who painted biblical subjects was Georges de La Tour (1593–1652). His work, particularly his use of light, suggests a familiarity with Caravaggio’s art, which he may have learned about from painters in Utrecht, such as ter Brugghen and van Honthorst (figs. 25-7 and 25-8). Although La Tour used the devices of Caravaggio’s Dutch followers, his effects are strikingly different from theirs. His Ado-ration of the Shepherds (fig. 25-36) makes use of the night setting favored by the Utrecht “Caravaggisti,” as they are often called, much as van Honthorst portrayed it. But here, the light, its source shaded by an old man’s hand, falls upon a very different company in a very different mood. A group of humble men and women, coarsely clad, gather in prayerful vigil around a luminous baby Jesus. Without the aid of the title, this work might be construed as a genre piece, a nar-rative of some event from peasant life. Nothing in the environment, placement, poses, dress, or attributes of the figures distinguishes them as the Virgin Mary, Joseph, Christ Child, or shepherds. The artist did not even give the religious personages halos. The light is not spiritual but material: it comes from a candle. La Tour’s scientific scrutiny of the effects of light as it throws
precise shadows on surfaces intercepting it nevertheless had reli-gious intention and consequence. The light illuminates a group of ordinary people held in a mystic trance induced by their witness-ing the miracle of the Incarnation. In this timeless tableau of simple people, La Tour eliminated the dogmatic significance and tradi-tional iconography of the birth of the Savior. Still, these people rev-erently contemplate something they regard as holy. The devout of any religious persuasion can read this painting, regardless of their familiarity with the biblical account. The supernatural calm pervading Adoration of the Shepherds is
characteristic of the mood of Georges de La Tour’s art. He achieved this by eliminating motion and emotive gesture (only the light is dramatic), by suppressing surface detail, and by simplifying body volumes. These stylistic traits are among those associated with clas-sical and Renaissance art. Thus several apparently contradictory elements meet in the work of La Tour: classical composure, fervent spirituality, and genre realism.
25-36 Georges de La Tour, Adoration of the Shepherds, 1645–1650. Oil on canvas, 39 60 × 49 60. Musée du Louvre, Paris.
Without the aid of the title, this candlelit nighttime scene could be a genre painting instead of a biblical narrative. La Tour did not even paint halos around the heads of the holy personages.


ENGLAND
In England, in sharp distinction to France, the common law and the Parliament kept royal power in check. England also differed from France (and Europe in general) in other significant ways. Although
an important part of English life, religion was not the conten-tious issue that it was on the Continent. The religious affiliations of the English included Catholicism, Anglicanism, Protestantism, and Puritanism (the English version of Calvinism). In the eco-nomic realm, England was the one country (other than the Dutch Republic) to take advantage of the opportunities that overseas trade offered. As an island, Britain (which after 1603 consisted of Eng-land, Wales, and Scotland), like the Dutch Republic, possessed a large and powerful navy, as well as excellent maritime capabilities.
Jones and Wren
In the 17th century, as during the Renaissance, the leading painters in England were Flemish or Dutch, among them Holbein (figs. 23-12 and 23-12A), Teerlinc (fig. 23-17), and van Dyck (fig. 25-5). The most significant English artistic achievements during the Baroque era were in the field of architecture, much of it, as in France, incor-porating classical elements.
Inigo Jones. The most important English architect of the first half of the 17th century was Inigo Jones (1573–1652), architect to Kings James I (r. 1603–1625) and Charles I (fig. 25-5). Jones spent considerable time in Italy. He greatly admired the classical author-ity and restraint of Andrea Palladio’s buildings and studied with great care his treatise on architecture. Jones borrowed many motifs from Palladio’s villas and palaces, and he adopted Palladio’s basic design principles for his own architecture, which transformed the medieval city of London. The nature of Jones’s achievement is evident in the buildings
he designed for his royal patrons, among them the Banqueting House (fig. 25-37) at Whitehall, used, as its name indicates for royal banquets and other festive occasions. (Adorning the ceiling of the grand interior hall is a 1634–1636 painting by Rubens depicting the apotheosis of James I—another instance of England importing Continental paint-ers for royal commissions.) For this structure, a symmetrical block of great clarity and dig-nity, Jones superimposed two orders (Ionic below, Corin-thian above), using columns in the center and pilasters near the ends. The balustraded roofline, uninterrupted in its horizontal sweep, predates the Louvre’s east facade (fig. 25-25) by more than 40 years. Palladio would have rec-ognized and approved all of the design elements, but the building as a whole is not a copy of his work. Although relying on the revered Ital-ian’s architectural vocabulary and syntax, Jones retained his independence as a designer. For two centuries, his influence in English architecture was almost as authoritative as Palladio’s.
25-37 Inigo Jones, Banqueting House (looking northeast), White-hall, London, England, 1619–1622.
Jones was a great admirer of the classical architecture of Palladio, and he adopted motifs from the Italian architect’s villas and palaces for the buildings he designed for his British royal patrons.
25-38 Christopher Wren, west facade of Saint Paul’s Cathedral, London, England, 1675–1710.
Wren’s cathedral replaced an old Gothic church. The facade design owes much to Palladio (fig. 22­56) and Borromini (fig. 24­11). The great dome recalls Saint Peter’s in Rome (figs. 22­25 and 24­4).


Christopher Wren. London’s majestic Saint Paul’s Cathedral (fig. 25-38) is the work of England’s most renowned architect, Christopher Wren (1632–1723). A mathematical genius and skilled engineer whose work won Isaac Newton’s praise, Wren became professor of astronomy at Gresham College in London at age 25. Mathematics led to architecture, and Charles II (r. 1649–1685) asked Wren to prepare a plan for restoring the old Gothic church dedicated to Saint Paul. Wren proposed remodeling the build-ing based on Roman structures. Within a few months, the Great Fire of London, which destroyed the old structure and many other churches in the city in 1666, gave Wren his opportunity. Although Jones’s work strongly influenced him, Wren also traveled in France, where the splendid palaces and state buildings being created in and around Paris at the time of the expansion of the Louvre palace (fig. 25-25) must have impressed him. Wren also closely studied prints illustrating Baroque architecture in Italy. In Saint Paul’s, he harmonized Palladian, French, and Italian Baroque features.
In view of its size, Saint Paul’s Cathedral was built with
remarkable speed—in little more than 30 years—and Wren lived to see it completed. The building’s form underwent constant refine-ment during construction, and Wren did not determine the final appearance of the towers until after 1700. In the splendid skyline composition, two foreground towers act effectively as foils to the great dome. Wren must have been aware of similar schemes that Italian architects had devised for Saint Peter’s (fig. 24-4) in Rome to solve the problem of the relationship between the facade and dome. Certainly, the influence of Borromini (figs. 24-7, top, rear, and 24-11) is evident in the upper levels and lanterns of the tow-ers. The lower levels owe a debt to Palladio (fig. 22-56), and the superposed paired columnar porticos recall the Louvre’s east facade (fig. 25-25). Wren’s skillful eclecticism brought all these foreign features into a grand and unified design. Wren received commissions for many other London churches
after the Great Fire. Even today, Wren’s towers and domes punc-tuate the skyline of London. Saint Paul’s dome is the tallest of all. Wren’s legacy was significant and long lasting, both in England and in colonial America, as examined in the next chapter.


THE BIG PICTURE
The Baroque in northern europe Flanders
■ In the 17th century, Flanders remained Catholic and under Spanish control. Flemish Baroque art was more closely tied to the Baroque art of Italy than was the art of much of the rest of Northern Europe.
■ The leading Flemish painter of this era was Peter Paul Rubens, whose work and influence were inter­ national in scope. A diplomat as well as an artist, he counted kings and queens among his patrons and friends. His paintings—for example, the series of huge canvases he painted for Marie de’ Medici to glo­ rify her career—exhibit Baroque splendor in color and ornament, and feature robust and foreshortened figures in swirling motion.
Dutch republic ■ The Dutch Republic received official recognition of its independence from Spain in the Peace of West­ phalia of 1648. Worldwide trade and banking brought prosperity to its predominantly Protestant citizenry, which largely rejected church art in favor of private commissions of portraits, genre scenes, landscapes, and still lifes.
■ Frans Hals produced innovative portraits of middle­class patrons in which a lively informality replaced the formulaic patterns of traditional portraiture. Aelbert Cuyp and Jacob van Ruisdael specialized in landscapes depicting specific places, not idealized Renaissance settings. Pieter Claesz, Willem Kalf, and others specialized in still lifes featuring meticulous depictions of worldly goods, sometimes amid reminders of death.
■ Rembrandt van Rijn, the greatest Dutch artist of the age, treated a broad range of subjects, including religious themes and portraits. His oil paintings are notable for their dramatic impact and subtle grada­ tions of light and shade as well as the artist’s ability to convey human emotions. Rembrandt was also a master printmaker. His Christ with the Sick etching sold for an astounding 100 guilders.
■ Johannes Vermeer specialized in painting the occupants of serene, comfortable Dutch homes. His convincing representation of interior spaces depended in part on his employment of a camera obscura. Vermeer was also a master of light and color and understood that shadows are not colorless.
France and england ■ The major art patron in 17th­century France was the Sun King, the absolutist monarch Louis XIV, who expanded the Louvre in Paris and built a vast palace and garden complex at nearby Versailles, featur­ ing sumptuous furnishings and sweeping vistas. Among the architects Louis employed were Charles Le Brun and Jules Hardouin­Mansart, who succeeded in marrying Italian Baroque and French classical styles.
■ The leading French proponent of classical painting was Nicolas Poussin, who spent most of his life in Rome and championed the “grand manner” of painting. This style called for heroic or divine subjects and classical compositions with figures often modeled on ancient statues.
■ Claude Lorrain, whose fame rivaled Poussin’s, specialized in classical landscapes rendered in linear and atmospheric perspective. His compositions often incorporated ancient ruins.
■ In 17th­century England, architecture was the most important art form. Two architects who achieved international fame were Inigo Jones and Christopher Wren. They harmonized the architectural principles of Andrea Palladio with the Italian Baroque and French classical styles in buildings such as the Banquet­ ing House (Jones) and Saint Paul’s Cathedral (Wren) in London

Rubens, Marie de’ Medici at Marseilles, 1622–1625
Kalf, Still Life with a Late Ming Ginger Jar, 1669
Rembrandt, Christ with the Sick, ca. 1649
Poussin, Et in Arcadia Ego, ca. 1655
Wren, Saint Paul’s, London, 1675–1710

26-1a The Enlightenment fascination with classical antiquity gave rise to the art movement called Neoclassicism. In this painting, Kauffman chose a classical sub-ject and clothed her figures in Roman garb.
26-1b Kauffman’s heroine is Cornelia, mother of Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus, political reformers during the Roman Republic. The portraits of the mother and her sons are based on ancient statuary.
26-1c The painting is an Enlightenment exemplum virtutis (“example of virtue”). When a visitor shows Cor-nelia her jewelry and asks to see Cornelia’s, the mother of the Gracchi presents her children as her jewels.
26-1 AngelicA KAuffmAn, Cornelia Presenting Her Children as Her Treasures, or Mother of the Gracchi, ca. 1785. Oil on canvas, 39 40 × 49 20. Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, Richmond (Adolph D. and Wilkins C. Williams Fund).
